---
layout: post
title: "Creating a Database"
date: 2020-02-01
---
For my final University project, I chose to design and create a database to be used by small businesses, to help them adhere to GDPR 
(General Data Protection Regulations). I spent a long time deciding which software to use, 
 partially to ensure it was user friendly and able to be secured to the GDPR standards. and partially because I'd never done it before so had to learn it!<br />
 I settled on using a [WAMP](http://www.wampserver.com/en/) environment because this was simple enough for me to set up and also quite simple to 
 build a small website to enable users to save data to the system. <br />
 <pre><code>
 &#60;body&#62; &#60;!-- script to link to javascript in a different page--&#62;< br />
 &#60;script type="text/javascript"src="http://tm470/www/data/externalJavaScript.js"&#62;&#60;/script&#62; 
</code></pre>
A bit of the code I used to make the form, showing a link to an external JavaScript page to utilize some regular expressions, this helps ensure the user has saved the clients details correctly.
<br />
<pre><code>
 &#60;p&#62;We are saving your data to ensure we are able to contact you in the future, this &#60;/br&#62;
 will only be used by our company and not be used for marketing purposes. &#60;/p&#62;<br /> &#60;form action="http://tm470/www/data/storedata.php" method="post" name="submitClientForm" onsubmit="return checkForm()"&#62;<br />
 &#60;table&#62;<br />
 &#60;tr&#62;&#60;td&#62;Please ensure you've read the above statement to the client&#60;/td&#62;<br />
 &#60;td&#62;&#60;input type="checkbox" name="dataSaved" required/&#62;&#60;/td&#62;<br />
 &#60;/tr&#62;
</code></pre>
 This bit shows a checkbox that must be ticked, to ensure the user has read a statement to the client, which all helps to adhere to the GRPR aspect. As well as showing the call for the checkForm() JavaScript function, and the link to the PHP file "storedata.php"<br />
 
 The JavaScript file contains code to ensure some of the fields in the form have been filled out correctly. Using HTML 5 means this isn't necesary for inputs such as email addresses, the form can have an email specified input <code> &#60;input type="email"&#62; </code> means the user has to include an @ symbol and end with a URL suffix such as ".co.uk". This input type also makes some smart devices display the ".com" button in the keyboard.
 <pre><code>
 //Section to check the phone number is 11 digits starting with '0'.
	var PhoneCheck=document.forms["submitClientForm"]["Number"].value;
	var PhoneExpression=/^[0][1-9]\d{9}$/;
	
	if (!PhoneCheck.match(PhoneExpression)){
		alert("Incorrect number, must be 11 digits with no space, beginning with 0");
		return false;
	}
</code></pre>
Some of the JavaScript I used showing the regular expression I used to ensure the user had put in an 11 digit number starting with an 0. The form on the HTML page calls the script the above snippet is from, allowing this to be checked on the users PC. This makes feedback much quicker, if the client is on the phone for instance then there is instant feedback that more information is required!<br />
I mentioned PHP above, this is the code I used to write the data to the database. it connected to another PHP file that I used solely to connect to the database ("index.php"). This compartmentalism of files means I can link to the "index.php" file form other files such as the one I use at the bottom of the webpage, which gets data from the database.
<pre><code>
 <?php
...
$ContactNumber = $_POST['ContactPhone'];
$ContactLetter = $_POST['ContactPost'];
//uses the external php file to connect to the database
require ('index.php');

</code></pre>
Code from the "storedata.php" file showing how I transferred the data given in the form to php variables.
<pre><code>
//inputs the user data into the database
$sql = "INSERT INTO clients (`Name`, `Address`, `Email`, `Number`, `Orders`, `Contact Email`, `Contact Number`, `Contact Letter`)
VALUES ('$Name', '$ClientAddress', '$ClientEmail', '$ClientNumber', '$Orders', '$ContactEmail', '$ContactNumber', '$ContactLetter');";
</code></pre>
Code showing the SQL code inside the "storedata.php" file.
As part of this project I installed WAMP onto my PC. Using the phpMyAdmin program to create the database. This allowed me to use the webpage to create new clients in the "clients" database which took care of the unique IDs without the user having to worry about it. 
One part about GDPR is the accidental deleting of data, I designed my webpage so that the user can only write new data or view existing data. Deleting entries in the database is not possible from the webpage to help prevent it from accidental deleting. Any deleting can be done by the data controller via the phpMyAdmin application.
<br />
This project isn't finished yet, I'd still like to include a user log in section, to allow users to access the webpage, but time was against me and I haven't had the opportunity to add this part yet! <br />
Sorry this was such a long entry, the website was quite simple but it incorporated lots of parts!
